All right, thanks Daniel for having me, everyone at the Active Inference Lab, sorry for cancelling
twice.
Life's been kind of crazy with finishing this book that this talk will be about and having
a kid I'm six months old and I got sick like a week ago, like right, leading up to like,
you know, didn't want to cancel a third time and look crazy.
So this is a very rushed presentation, it'll be better if it's more like a conversation
since I haven't even gone through the slides myself once.
And it's going to get into a lot of things like immediately like open up bags of worms,
like there's just philosophical issues, things that people won't agree about like immediately.
But yeah, so this is just going to be like a small introduction to the thesis in the
book.
And yeah, I'll explain more, I guess, after I begin.
So yeah, it's called this the integrated evolutionary synthesis compared to like the modern synthesis
or even the extended evolutionary synthesis.
This is integrated because it kind of reconceptualizes evolution, biology and evolution in terms
of thermodynamics and information theory or energy flows.
Energy and information flows takes from cybernetics.
So yeah, it's a non reductive theory of everything that includes emergent phenomena like life,
mind and civilization.
I say that because most theories of everything we're used to are fundamental physics theories
that don't have anything to say about life and consciousness.
They ignore them.
And I don't think those should be called theories of everything because theories of everything
should be an explanation for everything.
And if you leave the things that we care about most out, then it's not much of a theory of
everything.
So this is the book I've spent the last two to three years writing obsessively.
And it's available for pre-order now.
So if you want to check that out, you can find it with a Google search.
Here's the table of contents.
So the book is broken into three sections.
Part one talks about the origins of life and part two about evolution while part three
focuses on consciousness and free will and the fate of life in the universe.
So these really big questions that we're going to focus on part two and give a pretty superficial
overview of part two.
But you can feel free to ask me any questions about any of the other topics that are related.
And I'll try to see what I can answer without going into all of the information that I would
need to explain those things.
So Thomas Huxley, known as Darwin's bulldog, because he was such a strong advocate for
Darwin's theory, said that the question of questions for mankind, the problem which underlies
all others, is more deeply interesting than any other, is the ascertainment and of the
place which man occupies in nature and of his relations to the universe of things.
So where do we fit into the grand cosmic scheme?
So scientists in the 20th century and I would even say now believe that we are an accident.
So Jacques Manot, a French biochemist who won the Nobel Prize for Physiology and Medicine,
wrote a book called Chance and the Sesty, which was really influential.
And he was just as reductionist as you can get, man at last knows that he is alone in
the unfeeling immensity of the universe out of which he emerged only by chance, neither.
So some of the words are covered by Daniel.
So neither is his destiny spelled out nor his duty have been written down.
I think there's something wrong with that quote.
But so if there are times where I'm trying to read something where the picture's over,
I might have to skip.
You can move that because it looks different on my side.
It looks fine.
Perfect.
Yeah.
Neither his destiny nor his duty have been written down.
So that was kind of based on this old idea that the emergence of life was a product
of chance assembly.
So like this just statistical fluctuation that brought together all the molecules needed
to create the first cell.
We now know that that's probably not what happened.
It's this gradual process of self-organization.
Jeremy England has been in the media a lot about his theory of dissipative adaptation.
So let's see.
So we will see this is kind of like a different point of view.
Not everybody was convinced by Amano.
Carl Sagan said the origin of life must be a highly probable affair as soon as conditions
permit, up it pops.
So this is an important question, whether life was improbable or inevitable.
So if life is highly improbable, we're likely to be alone in the universe, but if the emergence
of life is inevitable, given a certain set of common physical conditions, then it's
likely that we have life at least on planets that are sufficiently Earth-like, specifically
have geochemistry like the Earths have a star, some like the Earths, because that's
what provides the energy that pushes it far from equilibrium.
So we're going to get into all that stuff pretty soon.
Christian Dedeau, this quote is kind of a response to Stephen Jay Gould, who just really
emphasized, to both Amano and Stephen Jay Gould, the importance of chance in nature
and that everything is basically a contingency that came from a chance process, where Dedeau
says that you can have this inevitability that some philosophers would see as teleology,
but it doesn't mean that this inevitable progress is being driven by a supernatural force.
He explains that the natural constraints within which chance operates are such that evolution
in the direction of increasing complexity was virtually bound to take place if given
the opportunity, chance does not exclude inevitability.
So he was also a Nobel Prize winning biologist, the same category as Amano, but had the complete
opposite opinion.
And we can talk about that too, basically, when systems are open systems and they're
pushed far from equilibrium by a flow of energy, you basically get something like a statistical
bias away from what we would expect with isolated systems, closed systems that aren't open to
energy will relax the thermodynamic equilibrium, and when a system is being pushed far from
equilibrium, it will naturally organize because organization happens under the flow of energy
and we're going to see exactly why it's a Darwinian process.
But basically, you get inevitability if you have the right ingredients.
So we'll talk about, to kind of frame this, we already kind of mentioned those two worldviews.
So the first worldview would be the reductionist worldview, and I should be clear that productionism
is also, it's a method and an ideology and we shouldn't confuse those two things.
And Daniel, I guess just so I'm, you know, know where I'm at maybe when you, when I've
gone 30 minutes, you can let me know.
Okay, I'll hoot.
Okay, great.
So reductionism, the method basically says that reality can be understood by breaking
down all physical phenomena into their simplest parts so that we may observe the basic behavior
of the fundamental constituents of nature.
So I'm just going to plug in this charger, I might need to do that in a bit, but basically
the method is how science works.
If we want to understand emergence, we also have to understand how the components that
systems are made of work in isolation.
So it's an essential part of the story, but it's not the whole part we'll see.
So the method inspired an ideology and ideology is just that, it's an ideology and it's rigid
and basically the method doesn't really imply that the ideology is true.
So when I'm attacking reductionism, I'm not attacking the method, I'm attacking the worldview.
And so that worldview, we can say that basically, so hard to determine is part of the reductionist
worldview.
So thought experiment that some people are familiar with, I'm sure Laplace's demon, but
basically Laplace was a French mathematician that took Newton's kind of model of reality
and applied it to everything.
Newton himself was kind of a mystic when it comes to life, he didn't really think that
physics apply to organisms or at least to humans.
But Laplace really came up with the idea that basically the evolution of the universe is
just this clockwork universe where it's like a machine with cogs that are just turning.
So there's no room for agency and free will in that picture.
When Boltzmann came along in the 19th century and came up with statistical mechanics, the
clockwork universe kind of became the billiard ball universe, but it's just the idea that
everything in the universe is made of atoms and that these atoms are interacting and that's
the whole picture.
So the ideology says we're nothing more than our atoms, so we don't make decisions, consciousness
is just an epiphenomenon and it feels to us like we are, but actually this trajectory
was determined basically, not basically from the moment of the Big Bang and there's kind
of no freedom in anything and no future other than what was determined from the beginning.
So the second law of thermodynamics also sort of shaped the reductionists were abused
as the universe is becoming increasingly disordered.
There's actually kind of two different interpretations of the second law.
The first one kind of emerged from the work of Carnot and Clausius, the kind of original
thermodynamics work where entropy was about a measure of energy that can't be used for
work.
It's a measure of like useless energy where later with Boltzmann he tried to put the second
law on like a statistical basis based on like atomic theory.
So basically people applied Boltzmann's statistical interpretation of the second law to the universe
and came up with this notion that the universe is becoming increasingly disordered, which
isn't great for life because it means that life is transient and likely cosmically insignificant
and this worldview is associated with materialism which doesn't recognize consciousness as real,
certainly doesn't recognize it as having causal power and historically it often ignored apparently
in material phenomena like energy and information and mental processes.
I am just going to grab my charger so sounds good.
This doesn't die but I will be right back.
Take your time.
So those who are watching live please feel free to leave a comment or a question.
I'm writing some things down.
We'll look forward to the return of electrical power to Bobby.
All right my first live stream I will be more prepared my return to part two that's something
else I told Daniel is that this is kind of like part one and I come back and talk about
the ideas that come after.
So it will have 15.2 it will be awesome it's an infinite sequence it's the sequence is
always yours great okay so reductionist worldview says that all life forms including humans
are nothing more than collections of atoms obligatorily following fixed and arbitrary
mechanical trajectories determined solely by math and not by mine.
So this worldview if you convince someone that they don't have free will because you
tell them about the reductionist worldview there was actually a study where they did
this and they read participants passage from Francis Crick explaining that it appears that
we don't have any free will the participants actually on subsequent tests were more likely
to cheat on the test because they felt like they didn't have any personal responsibility
they weren't making the decisions therefore they could cheat that's kind of funny because
they are actually you can see that like by what they're like being told that they are
changing their behavior so it is having some kind of effect if we do in fact have agency
or free will and we're kind of talking about agency we don't really get into free will
but those are related topics but if that's not true then that's really bad that the majority
of scientists are telling people we don't have free will because the people that believe
this it's having negative effects on for example mental health other studies have shown that
believe in no free will can lead to depression and believe in free will can have all these positive
effects. Of course as soon as I start talking about free will I'm sure a lot of people have
objections might think that there's no way that we can have room for free will in a physical
worldview but that's exactly what we're going to begin to talk about today the causal power of
information and that basically organisms are agents that are cybernetic control units so
as controllers we do have agency so and the belief that we're accidents of nature rather
than natural manifestations of physical laws I'm sure also impacts our sense of well-being just
so you know I'm not making this up I can I'll give you some quotes from really famous physicists
who are kind of militant reductionists so Brian Green says I think it's very important to face
up to the truth of reality which is in fact that life and consciousness is a fleeting phenomenon
on the entire cosmological timeline. Brian Green just came out with a book and he's like
going on interviews just saying this and it's really interesting because some other famous
physicists don't agree at all and he's stating it like it's a complete fact so for example David
Deutsch would not agree with this and we'll get into that Sabine Hauston Felder is another person
I know some of the some of my friends in the community who are these people you know working on
emergence and causation stuff get bothered by her statements because she is also very
ultra-reductionistic so I wish people would stop insisting they have free will it's terribly
annoying insisting that free will exist is bad science like insisting that horoscopes tell
you something about the future it's not compatible with our knowledge about nature so I'm saying
that's wrong we won't get into free will that much but if you have questions at the end we will
talk about how information adaptive information gets built up by evolution in
adaptive systems complex adaptive systems and you will see how these systems actually do control
their own future so Sam Harris is another anti-free will person says you're not controlling
the storm and you are not lost in it you are the storm so it's kind of funny because he's using a
metaphor here but what this story kind of reveals is that yes we are a storm that's right we are a
dissipative structure like a storm emerges to dissipate an energy gradient and we're not really
going to talk about that that's what the first part of the book is about the origins part but
I'm just pointing it out because it's interesting because we are like a storm in that aspect
but we also differ from a storm because a storm does not have agency a storm does not have the
ability to seek out new energy gradients it's just kind of
being pushed around by these gradients in nature where organisms are actually
controllers and so you are a storm but you do have control over this storm
so these people are kind of have the opposite view so Julio Tinoni creator of integrated
information theory says there is true free will a great lecture that just popped up I think
months ago where he gives a two-hour talk on basically integrate information and how it shows
that systems do you have causal power and in a way have free will so depending on your definition
of free will we do that free will according to his model David Doge said in an interview with
John Horgan just a year ago or so I'm sure we have free will Christoph Koch says explains how
you know there are a lot of experiments the LeBet experiments which we will talk about next time
that basically some people interpret it as not having free will but actually
we will see later when you deliberate that's actually an act of free will these choices
where we're actually where you bring your entire conscious being to that question and try to
analyze it under all the various conditions and actually there was a study Koch did that kind of
showed that the LeBet study was kind of interpreted wrong and for anyone who understands that stuff
the readiness potential that was supposed to be proof that there was no free will disappeared when
the decisions involved deliberation so yeah that's kind of meandering but I'm sure a lot of people
are interested in this bigger picture of why this emergence paradigm is so radically different from
the reductionist paradigm it kind of puts information front and center and systems that process
information complex adaptive systems are computational systems and the systems in the with
these systems information actually does have causal power we're going to explain what we mean by that
so paradigm of emergence the collective says the collective behavior of interacting parts not
simply how they function in isolation is key to understanding the emergence and evolution
of all the fascinating organisms and ecosystems that make up the biosphere so it's really not about
just like particles it's about the patterns that emerge when these systems find these certain
configurations through basically Darwinian mechanisms and we'll see that self-organization
too has a Darwinian dynamic each emergence in the cosmic self-organization process is brought
about by higher order phase transition that moves life ever further away from a state of
thermodynamic equilibrium and total disorder I'm assuming the audience knows that what
thermodynamic equilibrium is it's basically if you have for example Boltzmann took a model of
an ideal gas and explained that for example if the gas molecules are bunched up in the corner
naturally it's going the gas is going to spread out until there's no pattern and basically it's
like a completely mixed up state so equilibrium is associated with death and disorder because
systems naturally tend toward this more mixed up un-patterned completely chaotic state
of course later we're going to talk about why open systems that that rule doesn't apply basically
systems that are open to the flow of energy can resist this tendency towards a disorder
and that's really what the whole story is kind of based on um so through a nested series of such
phase transitions these are also called these higher order phase transitions are major evolutionary
transitions John Maynard Smith talked about them and metasystem transitions by the cyber-neticist
Valentin Turchin basically the same concept with some subtle differences so the idea is that
cosmic self-organization is a series of these transitions where functional things come together
to make larger functional ones which come together to even to make even larger ones and so on and
through this process adaptive complexity or life so that's a more general way to talk about life
becomes better equipped to dominate the cosmos life requires an organization that is increasingly
hierarchical and integrated and therefore more resilient and computationally powerful
so here are just a couple of figures um you see this hierarchy uh in this structural hierarchy
of matter in life this was adapted from a big physics journal I can't remember which one it was
but um basically you know physicists are recognizing this hierarchy even when it extends to life so
Jeffrey West's book scale comes to mind uh and so we see the hierarchy of science kind of naturally
mirror this hierarchy of matter and life and um the reductionist picture would say that these
things at the top here um are kind of insignificant parts of the story transient um but we will see
that this you know the more we go up the more influence uh on cosmic evolution the phenomena have
so uh Thomas Huxley's question about man's place in the cosmos uh is um basically the emergence
of paradigm uh the paradigm of emergence I'm going to discuss and actually this is kind of
maybe like in a specific or a new paradigm of emergence because it includes all this stuff about
thermodynamics and information theory um sense that emergence the emergence and evolution of
life minds societies and technology are all part of one thermodynamic process one evolutionary
process one computational process unified by the concept of knowledge so uh this theory is a theory
of knowledge creation um and so knowledge is going to be the unifying theme and we'll briefly
talk about epistemology I wanted to talk about it more but it just would have been too long um cosmic
evolution uh in this paradigm is a universal process of becoming as opposed to being so the
universe isn't this static thing uh it's actually evolving very much like an organism or a complex
adaptive system um so it's not a panpsychic theory in this theory consciousness emerges that's very
important um but you might call it emergent panpsychism uh because uh as this evolutionary
process proceeds uh an animate matter as life spreads gets converted into animate matter
so in this picture humans are neither a cosmic accident nor the end goal of evolution
so we are instead a step on the evolutionary ladder of becoming and we are also potentially an
essential driver of increasing cosmic complexity so this big idea is that the universe is undergoing
this majestic self-organizing process and at this moment of time at least in this corner of the
universe we are the stars of the show um this picture is from Eric Chasen's uh both the rise of
complexity uh cosmic evolution the rise of complexity uh he's a harvard astrophysicist
um but i just used uh freeman daison code here because it seemed irrelevant it's conceivable
that life may have a larger role to play than we have yet imagined life may succeed against
all odds in molding the universe to its own purpose so i guess brian green doesn't buy that at all
but um if that's true then uh as as cosmology cosmologists have to think about the the role
of life there's a lot of people who have said similar things like septaloid and famously
raker as well um so just a couple quotes here so you know you know when when people hear these
terms progress there's just the stigma immediately they thought like oh someone's trying to sneak in
religion or some intelligent design theory um so you see these trusted names of physics here david
oich has narrowly conceived evolutionary theory considers as mere vehicles for the replication
of our genes or memes and it refuses to address the question of why evolution has tended to create
ever greater adaptive complexity or the role that such complexity plays in the wider scheme of things
so there is clearly implying that adaptive complexity does have this larger role to play
um we now see how it is possible for the universe to increase both organization and entropy at the
same time the optimistic and pessimistic eras of time can coexist the universe can display
creative unidirectional unidirectional progress even in the face of the second law because as
paul davies says that um so that's really uh kind of a key point uh in this is that um
the second law actually is in a sense driving this increase in progress so not only can we have
unidirectional progress in the face of the second law uh it seems that this progress requires the
second law uh because we'll see that the second law is the basically the natural selection pressure
for uh self-organizing systems so in a sense the second law is both uh shiva the destroyer and
Brahma the creator um so a goal of this unifying theory of reality uh i've been calling the great
conciliance it was actually a name uh suggested by marco lin who is uh is a firstonian and
influenced some of this talk um so basically the unifying theory of reality illuminates the
connection between complexity cognition consciousness and cosmic evolution or matter
of mind and cosmos um and it's really based on complexity science it's a lot broader than
complexity science but i guess that name kind of you know includes everything so it's a unification
of major sciences of our time including but not limited to physics biology neuroscience computer
science evolutionary theory and statistics and basically it describes complex adaptive systems
of all scales in terms of energy and information flows so it uses statistical thermodynamics
information theory and cybernetics um so we will talk about those a bit uh coming up so if you
want to see kind of like a map of what sort of informs uh this non-reductive theory of everything
here you go so i know there's a lot of information so i'll kind of try to simplify this for everyone
um there are some unifying paradigms that have emerged so basically this theory is nothing new
it's basically evolutionary epistemology um after that came universal Darwinism and later uh right
now we're seeing this kind of revolution with like Bayesian inference and these ideas being applied
to everything um so uh being informed uh by these um paradigms and uh combining those paradigms are
updating them i should say with uh information from non-equilibrium thermodynamics so we're
talking about the thermodynamics of open systems uh information theory so Shannon's theory uh
some of you will know that information theory is related very closely to non-equilibrium
thermodynamics and basically uh Boltzmann's statistical entropy is mathematically the same as uh
Shannon entropy or information entropy which is a measure of uncertainty um if i had more time i would
go through thermodynamics and the different types of entropy but uh we don't have time for that but
if anyone has any questions i can clarify um cybernetics was basically information theory
applied to biology adaptive systems it was the first science of adaptive systems really and uh
it's funny while writing this uh i found out because you know i hadn't i had heard the name
cybernetics but it wasn't clear how important it was um in a talk by uh Jim Crutchfeld uh
Santa Fe Institute basically revealed that uh because cybernetics got associated with like the
Russian uh like during the Cold War kind of like the Russian agenda um cybernetics was used
to design like heat seeking missiles uh Norbert Wiener's theory was almost immediately applied
for military uses and because of that it stopped being taught in American uh colleges um so uh yeah
it's really important and it was actually uh emerging at the same time as information theory
people were already uh thinking about systems in terms of information flows but it's more than
information theory because it's a science of feedback um so dynamical systems theory or
complex adaptive systems is kind of like an offshoot of that um all of these inform what
i've called universal Bayesianism not the only person to call it that um i had searched that
term and found Adam Saffron's uh paper on integrated world modeling theory that used that same term
but uh John Campbell has been a researcher um who has uh done a lot to show this equivalence between
uh evolutionary processes and processes of Bayesian inference we're gonna talk about that in a little
bit um so yeah if anybody has any questions about that but really all of these things origin of life
research integrate evolutionary theory um if you haven't checked out the work of these people like
everybody here's worth reading their work but uh so from that we get the unifying theory of reality
that is based on what i call the evolutionary epistemology universal Darwinism universal
Bayesianism framework that's a long name i'm aware of that but it's just to show that these
three theories are basically the same theory um so universal Darwinism says that the universe is
evolving at every scale through both competitive evolution and through self-organization which
is cooperative evolution among agents that have formed a collective unit so it started with Richard
Dawkins and his concepts of the meme and the selfish gene that uh memes uh were these uh cultural
units that were equivalent to genes and so we started to see how information was this paradigm
that could be extended beyond biology and then we had Dan Dennett and Darwin's dangerous idea
really extend this to like everything to self-organizing systems to like cultural and
technological systems uh evolutionary epistemology came before that it was based on Karl Popper's
philosophy but it was actually invented by cognitive psychologist Donald Campbell and
basically that said that the evolutionary process is a problem solving procedure that creates knowledge
so uh the information stored in genomes and in uh brains and cultural memory uh basically
that all that knowledge accumulates from an evolutionary process and it's really helpful
to think of it as knowledge especially when we start to talk about this in in uh the context of
thermodynamics and information because uh basically this knowledge is what allows life adaptive systems
to stay far from equilibrium they can resist this tendency towards decay life can continue to persist
if it can acquire the knowledge that it needs to essentially to find free energy that will allow
it to sustain itself um so we'll talk about that in a second more um so universal Bayesianism
is a Bayesian update of the first two paradigms knowledge is encoded uh so the knowledge that
evolutionary epistemology can describe it's actually encoded in biological systems uh
in the form of a world model so this model is an internal representation and statistical mapping
of the environment which gets updated through adaptation and adaptive learning and talk about
that process um really the the whole Bayesian brain hypothesis and free energy principle
is inspired by cybernetics heavily so Ross Ashby's good regulator theorem and law of
requisite variety which we'll talk about was kind of the first talk of systems having models and
having to model the environment um so Crawfordston says inference is actually quite close to a
theory of everything including evolution consciousness and life itself uh we're not
going to go into those bigger implications that would be at the uh end of the book in the last
chapter but basically this isn't just a theory about evolution um well it is evolution but
evolution applied way more broadly so quantum mechanics has uh an interpretation that's consistent
with this and bigger problems like the fine-tuning of the constants and parameters that allow for
the emergence of life in the universe we can actually uh probably have the best explanation
for the fine-tuning problem and the measurement problem of quantum mechanics uh with this theory
um we won't talk about it but just so you know next time uh cosmological natural selection by
Lee Smolin is the theory that kind of addresses the fine-tuning problem from a universal Darwinism
perspective while quantum Darwinism uh addresses the measurement problem um so we will save that
from next time but feel free to ask questions about any of those so what does this do I have this
name poetic metanaturalism I meant to take that out but uh next time we'll get into why I chose
that name it's actually um it sounds kind of like you know like complex or buzzword or jargony but
there's actually very practical reasons for having that name um so this uh unifying theory
bridges matter with mine so universal Darwinism gives us a picture of the open-ended complexity
growth uh that this whole idea is based on the idea that evolution keeps producing uh
increasingly complex intelligent forms of life excuse me um so uh yeah universal Bayesianism is
the link that kind of connects those paradigms with uh consciousness so again we won't get into
that today but when uh you understand that knowledge is stored stored in the form of a world model
that a system that models itself can experience then we start to get a better understanding of
like what consciousness is consciousness is it's a it's a mental model so it's not a traditional
panpsychic theory even though I know first in and Levin and some of his colleagues have kind of
been flirting with panpsychism this theory would say that's wrong and it's kind of uh reduces
consciousness to something trivial um by saying that it's in everything like um a proton is conscious
because it's a triad of quarks that have to be in a certain configuration so there is some minimal
level of integrated information um that's not enough uh to get a conscious experience again
observer um so saffron's integrated world modern theory says that you need a model with spatial,
temporal and causal coherence I would also argue that it requires self-modeling capacity
talk about that a little bit at the end if anyone's interested um but this theory is supposed to
bridge mine with cosmic evolution so the story starts with the second law um Daniel if there's
any questions about that like intro let me know yeah if not I can just proceed could I ask two
questions from the chat sure okay the first question is from blue blue wrote do you think
that non-living autonomous agents with multiple competing priorities such as self-driving cars
have free will if not what is the defining difference between these systems and humans
uh no I don't think they have free will so um adaptive information is a special type of information
I do think those things and this is kind of following Sarah Walker's lead who's at Arizona
State I think she's also SFI faculty now but basically um to have self-driving cars you first
need life so anything like a self-driving car that's like this information processing system
if you were to come across a broken down self-driving car on some planet and you saw that
you would have to infer that there was also life there because life is part of the trajectory to
get to that but I wouldn't say that it has free will because it's just this input output machine
with a defined set of algorithms and uh adaptive systems are more flexible uh and
they're okay so in the next next time we'll talk about actually the emergence of agency
which occurs with the origin of life or a biogenesis and you basically um because this self-organized
system that would be kind of like the proto-cell um is evolving through a mechanism that Darwinian
dynamic for self-organization that will explain in a bit it builds up information and at some point
there's a phase transition where the information that's getting built up in the system uh basically
gains what Sarah Walker and Paul Davies call informational control so there's a point where
information actually starts calling the shots and you can see the difference between uh systems
that where there is informational control so living systems and inanimate systems because for
example um inanimate systems uh their movement can be predicted with Newton's laws so anyone who's
taken first year physics probably had to do an exercise where you're trying to predict the movement
of some macroscopic system like a ball that gets kicked or pushed by a gust of wind and what you do
is you um you have to draw out all the forces acting on the system and then you can understand
where the system's going to go with life you don't need an external force for it to start for example
climbing uphill um that's internally generated of course it's not magic uh the adaptive system the
agent uh has stored energy that it's extracted from the environment so for example humans that
are eating food and there's a metabolic process that's driving this but uh still yeah you with
living systems that where information has causal power uh basically the trajectory of the system
can't be predicted by these fundamental laws of physics um Philip Ball the journalist that
has been talking about this um his recent article which caused a lot of controversy between like
the reductionist like talking about free will and agency um and there's a lot of confusion around
that so people like Jerry Coyne were like trying to shoot it down and yeah hopefully I can talk about
that um I guess we'll talk about that next time because there's a lot of uh confusion about what
we're saying when we say something has agency or free will but his example is if you throw throw a
ball and a bird off a tower and you can predict what one is going to do you can't predict what the
other is going to do um interestingly though I would say that the bird's not completely unpredictable
you can predict that it's not going to hit the ground it's not going to splat on the ground
it's going to fly away uh you have to understand the bird in terms of its goals so you have to
understand you know the bird and its environment and the information that got built up through
evolution and then we can start to predict the bird uh its statistical behavior so inanimate
systems you can pretty much precisely predict the movement unless they're chaotic systems which is
another story but with life um yeah it's not predictable in that same way with like low level
laws of physics but uh I'm arguing that actually life is more predictable than we've thought
but you need things like uh non-equilibrium statistical mechanics and for example uh free
energy principle um so you can say that you know an organism will try to minimize free energy or
minimize the difference between uh its models prediction and reality so it will try to minimize
prediction error and that's a way that we can start to describe uh behaviors statistically so
um you know was there another one yep can I ask the second question yeah I I know I didn't
completely answer that but uh that will require like the all of the points that I would get into
in the second talk but it's a great question yeah I would have written in a larger margin if I had
more time the second question is from Joseph Clark who wrote first complimented your talk and
let you knew that you were an interesting guy so then the question was how far do you think the
universe can organize itself and what does that look like okay great that's a perfect question
to lead into the next part and hopefully by the end of this uh we will have some sort of answer for
that which is good because I when I started making the beginning of the presentation I was
going to get to consciousness and free will and I ran out of time so there's been a lot of talk
about things that I won't get to but that we will get to um so uh the story starts with the second
law um so the second law of thermodynamics as popularly popularly understood says that uh
systems naturally become increasingly disordered um that's really just because of the large scale
effects of chance so there are many ways to be disordered and there are relatively fewer ways
to be patterned um so a system that's this collective of particles so this evolving
ensemble of particles uh will naturally tend to move towards a configuration that's completely
spread out and mixed up there are no uh energy gradient so no work can be extracted that's a
state of equilibrium so we are going to use this word thermodynamic equilibrium uh to mean death
in disorder so life wants to resist the tendency towards equilibrium and wants to stay ordered
what's interesting about this is that it applies to all this is kind of like
where the free energy principle in first sense Bayesian brain hypothesis it frames everything
this way so I thought it was a good way to kind of frame it here is that you start with the second
law and any conceivable system any ordered system for it to continue to persist has to resist this
tendency so um basically uh Schrodinger the guy everybody knows from quantum mechanics in the
in the cat thought experiment he wrote a book called what is life in the 40s and uh basically
kind of solved this paradox like if there's a second law and things become more disordered
than what's with life and what's with the biosphere and all this complexity that we see around us
is and he explained actually Boltzmann explained this before him um but Boltzmann said a lot to
contradict this as well um or just didn't follow this to its implications but Schrodinger explained
that open systems by feeding off uh free energy in the environment so free energy is just energy
that uh you can extract work from so it's ordered energy as opposed to energy that's been dissipated
in the form of heat you can't extract energy useful energy from that energy it's still there it's
just spread out and it's it's you can't harness it collecting it would cost more than you get out
of it so um Schrodinger explained that uh if a system can get free energy which he called negative
entropy or energy uh negentropies was called by uh someone later um so to understand how ordered
systems stay ordered uh you basically need to understand that they have to uh constantly be
extracting free energy from the environment the moment that they can't extract more free energy
is the moment that the system dies and decays to equilibrium so um basically uh the second
law is not violated by life because um in this effort to stay far from equilibrium life it keeps
extracting that ordered free energy and keeps dissipating it as heat so so it's basically
exporting entropy into the environment so the order um that is maintained uh is paid for
by the dissipated energy which comes becomes thermal entropy so there are multiple definitions
of entropy so you have thermal entropy which is heat entropy and then statistical entropy
which explains thermal entropy but it has a broader domain of application so you can talk
about a shuffling a deck of cards and you can talk about like the statistical entropy increasing
if the deck is ordered and it starts becoming mixed up through the shuffling but the deck
of cards the thermal entropy uh isn't changing much at all so there's different types of entropy
there's also information entropy which has to do with the um uh the number of messages that
could be sent across the channel instead of um the number of states that a system can be in
the number of microstates without changing the macro state macro state or uh the kind of um
collective properties of the system there's a really neat relationship between statistical
entropy and information entropy which i won't talk about here it was really fleshed out by uh et
janes uh but yeah so information and entropy like go hand in hand um just to give a little more
context before we get into the details uh david doidge and this great ted talk um called after
billions of years of monotony the universe is waking up says if one can speak of a cosmic war
it's a war between monotony and novelty between stasis and creativity and in this war our side
is not destined to lose if we choose to apply our unique capacity to create explanatory knowledge
we could win so that's very different than brian green story and it kind of gets at the second
question that was asked there how how far can this complexity increase go and so this kind of fore
shadows that maybe it doesn't have a limit and that seems you know most people think that would
go against the second law of thermodynamics we're going to see why that's not necessarily true
um but you can also see this cosmic war as this fight between order versus disorder life versus
entropy and knowledge versus uncertainty or ignorance um but is life's battle against disorder
good versus evil or yin and yang so i'm going to kind of argue that these two things kind of
have this uh you can describe their relationship as causally dependent and it's kind of like this
dialectic between life and uh disorder um and it is through this sort of uh interaction that
creates progress so we have some eastern ideas mentioned again um but when i was writing the
book a friend that practices buddhism called me and told me about this interdependent
co-arising idea which i thought was really cool so we're going to come up with this what we call
popper's principle which is uh problems create progress we're going to see that this problem
of entropy that this tendency towards decay is what actually forces systems to evolve basically
it forces them to search what's called the configuration space for the faith space for
the state space to find configurations that are good at extracting energy and that allows it to
stay far from equilibrium so we're going to have some figures soon so this stuff that's
kind of abstract becomes a little bit more concrete just out of respect to the earlier
request how about you check the time and feel then how fast you'd like to continue however much you
want to present and then if you want to take any questions but first just check the time and let
just i i how i i didn't uh i didn't uh notice when we started so about how long have i been
going i would say five zero minutes really okay how long can we go we can go another
uh 99 minutes okay um i'll try to go through it a little bit faster um but yeah so um
um but if we use all the time i told you yesterday that i was feeling uh oh i had a sore throat
and uh the sore throat's better today i'm hopped up on cold medicine i'm sure i'm gonna
i'm gonna pay for tomorrow but um yeah if we use all the time with questions that would be good
uh so in our everyday experiment experience things don't naturally become ordered unless
someone intervenes rooms get messier buildings erode uh so we already talked about this trodinger's
solution so we can think of life as a game uh so life has always been playing a game against
the second law of thermodynamics there is another narrative that i won't go into but life is also
an energy flow channel so life by existing and computing and trying to stay far from equilibrium
is also increasing entropy uh actually the universe of life will increase entropy at a
faster rate than the universe without life um which is pretty interesting so it's again not
necessarily that life it's like battling against entropy and in many ways it increases entropy but
there's also this story i guess what it's trying to battle is the tendency towards disorder so it
depends on what type of entropy you're talking about um so the challenge in the game of life
which applies to you as well as other simpler adaptive systems is to resist that tendency
so this gives life a goal for teleology so teleology was associated with kind of this mystical thing but
basically we'll we're seeing that teleology is just uh agency it's just a result goal-oriented
behavior as a result of the information that's been accumulated over evolution so teleology
the book uh tries to naturalize teleology and just say that they're these goal-oriented systems
that behave different uh because they are acquiring information through Darwinian evolution um
so life has to extract free energy that's how it stays in the game of life and to extract free
energy it's it's not a simple task so the computational task of extracting free energy
requires that the uh system acquire information about its environment otherwise it can't find
energy uh it also requires that the system model its environment so the information is creating
this predictive model this generative model and it is um that model that allows it to continuously
find free energy um so we will explain that life strategy is it searches through a configuration
space for solutions to the problem of survival through trial and error search uh variation
and selection so we we know about evolution there's this genetic variation in natural selection
and uh we're going to argue that that process that mechanism is much broader the evolutionary
mechanism is actually the mechanism of the scientific method and of adaptive learning um
and that mechanism is also a process that accumulates evidence-based knowledge so it's
also a process of Bayesian inference we're going to explain why so here we have those different
mechanisms with different names um so it's not included here but uh so if life is a game
there are levels to this game uh and the levels we're going to see are these uh evolutionary
transitions every time life graduates to this uh more uh complex hierarchical system like when
single-celled organisms come together to form a multi-cellular organism and multi-cellular
organisms come together to form communities like societies uh that you can view these evolutionary
transitions as as life graduating to a new level so um we're going to talk about how adaptive
information gets built up through evolution and uh we're calling that knowledge it's nice to have
that word knowledge because this process of an adaptive system acquiring this information is
actually reducing its uncertainty about the environment so it's it's reducing its ignorance
about all the ways the surrounding world could potentially surprise it uh so knowledge is a
nice word some philosophers like old school philosophers might have issue with that um because
in some teachings like knowledge is something that like conscious beings with like awareness have
but we're calling any adaptive information knowledge and it's that more of a technical
definition because knowledge is that information which reduces uncertainty and you could actually
quantify this process of evolution terence deacon has talked a lot about how you can do that with
information measures um so just to explain this why is knowledge something that matters like does
it have causal power or is it all just this this billiard ball universe where it's like these
particles bump into each other and you can basically use uh fundamental laws of physics
to describe like the trajectory of all the particles in the universe this is saying no
that the information that gets built up through evolution has causal power such that these systems
start to behave in ways that are different than what would be predicted from uh something our
new laws so we also have this process of anti accretion that sarah walker likes to talk about
but anti so anti accretion is uh basically we're familiar with uh planets pulling in matter
so bodies like asteroids because gravity pulls matter in naturally but anti accretion is when a
planet is ejecting matter and uh in many cases what well so the the only time we really see
anti accretion uh is when you have a planet with a life on it so um right now
bits of biosphere so humans and space rockets are being sent to other celestial bodies so that's a
form of anti accretion uh sending up satellites you won't see a satellite get sent out if you see
that in the universe uh like you're looking at some other solar system and you see a body
sent out and put into orbit from a planet that's an indication that life is there that's a biosignature
so she says that anti accretion requires comprehenders specifically the existence of
physical systems with knowledge of newton's laws um so what does it all mean um it means we need
knowledge uh to uh keep us out of thermodynamic equilibrium um so how do we acquire knowledge uh
science is the most uh is the most salient example of the causal power of knowledge so
science uh has uh eradicated lethal diseases built a global communication network called the
internet and created weapons of apocalyptic power it's not always good this power of knowledge but um
we see that there's something about the scientific method which is efficient at
uh accumulating knowledge so we're going to talk about why and that's where we get into
carl popper and evolutionary epistemology um so we know knowledge is important
carl poppers says we're always faced with practical problems and out of these grow
sometimes theoretical problems before we try to solve some of our problems by proposing theories
so uh popper stresses that all of science starts with a problem either theoretical
or practical um and it is that problem that forces us to seek out a solution so we can already see
why this principle that i've called popper's principle uh says that problems create progress
so some of these theories that we make to try to solve our problems will be wrong they'll be errors
um but the idea with science is that those errors get filtered out by a process of testing your
theories and a peer review process which gives criticism so uh knowledge is really uh for knowledge
for us to know that some piece of information is knowledge it really needs to be tested and uh
we call that evidence-based knowledge or evidence-based information so it's really the only true
kind of knowledge because you don't know if something's true until you test it for example um
um the world doesn't look round from a naive perspective it looks flat so for example um
someone who had the first idea you know and i'm sure it was before anybody famous we knew someone
had this idea and probably people blew it off but um uh some things that are true about reality
are not immediate immediately apparent from like sensory observation from since data so we really
need to test our theories if we are going to be sure about them um so what popper found out was
the scientific method is an algorithm you call that algorithm conjecture and refutation and uh
basically this is the method of hypothesis testing so you have a problem you believe can be solved
you make an informed guess or conjecture to see if your theory can be refuted prove false by testing
its predictions so uh people have pointed out like john cambell uh call first in that uh science is a
process of inference so it recognizes statistical patterns and trends in nature that we can use to
make increasingly accurate predictions um it would not be inaccurate than to say that the
function or purpose of science is to generate predictive knowledge um and we can characterize
that as a process of inference which basically means that scientists draw logical conclusions
about the way the world works uh based on evidence based information acquired in the past but with
never present awareness that the information can and will lead to um to new conclusions and deeper
understanding so when we recognize this we also have to recognize that all of our models will
have uncertainty um so we should never think that our models right every model is going to be
proved wrong in some way but through the scientific process uh the idea is that we get closer and
closer to truth so we can never reach perfect truth but in this model you can actually get
closer to it so in some senses it's different than like post-modernist philosophy that says
there is no objective truth there is an objective truth um uh but we can never know it but we can
get closer to it uh so once Papa understood that knowledge the knowledge generating mechanism behind
science success was conjecturing refutation he realized that human learning which begins at
birth and continues to death uses the same problem solving algorithm although the developmental
psychology literature called the method trial and error so because life is constantly presenting
us with new challenges such as the need to get from one place to another a problem that inspires
babies to learn to walk we must constantly try out new behavioral solutions we can think of these
actions as guesses about how to survive or if you prefer experiments innovating equilibrium or
predictions for persistence and they will often fail um so this is Dan Dennett's idea of life
exploring this design space we're going to talk about how it does so through evolution but we're
still talking about science here and adaptive learning on an abstract level we can imagine
a certain practical problem as a challenge one with the solution that exists somewhere out there
in the space of possibilities just waiting to be found by someone's sufficiently motivated and
clever it may take some time but if the possibility space the space of possible solutions is continuously
explored in an efficient way eventually a solution will be discovered so excuse me trial and error
learning explores the solution space um so just to give you a clear example of how adaptive
learning uh is kind of this form of hypothesis testing so whenever we have a problem in life and
we don't know the correct solution to a problem in advance um we naturally begin with those potential
solutions that are closer to our starting point in the solution space for sampling so for example
if a baby reaches for its bottle and barely misses it'll adjust its behavior slightly which minimizes
the chances of making an error um so our instincts may nudges in the general direction of a solution
but the instinct alone is not enough uh we have to try out what you could call a behavioral
conjecture and when it fails uh we try something new so that's kind of like a new theory and uh
it's essentially the old one but with a little twist and if that behavioral solution is remembered
then it's gets stored for future use ready to be repeated but also adapted if necessary um
but in humans so the baby example reaching for the bottle let's say it misses the bottle it
won't get a reward signal it won't get a little surge of dopamine so if it corrects and it gets
closer it gets a little reward signal this is reinforcement learning but basically this adaptive
learning process is a process of making theories and eliminating those theories that are errors
so uh popper saw that scientific knowledge and the evolutionary process uh were also connected so
not only is science uh adaptive learning uh both of those things are extensions of the
evolutionary process so he says in science theories are highly competitive we discuss them
critically we test them and we eliminate the series which we judge to be less good in solving
the problems which we wish to solve so only that's theories those which are most fit survive in
the struggle this is the way science grows um so that's kind of nice like showing you
really how this is an evolutionary process um not only a science and evolutionary process
the converse is true evolution is a scientific process so it is clear this is another quote
it is clear that this view of the progress of science is very similar to darwin's view of
natural selection by the way of the elimination of the unfit of the errors in the evolution of
life the errors in the attempts at adaptation which is a trial and error process analogously
science works by trial theory making and by the elimination of errors um i might pause in a second
just to um see if everybody understands this but i have a few more slides so um evolutionary
algorithms uh also use this mechanism but it's called generate and test so i didn't mention this uh
the mechanism of evolution is variation and selection so we have these algorithms that are
equivalent conjecture and error mutation trial and error variation and selection we also have
generated test so in machine learning evolutionary algorithms uh have this method uh generating
tests um possible solutions are generated into an actual solution is found and these
solutions accumulate in some memory store while the errors are filtered out and forgotten
in science the solutions are theories or models that actually predict some natural phenomena
and the successful full ones accumulate in peer review journals and textbooks so um
we see that these processes are equivalent and we're actually going to see that it's this
Bayesian process uh that adaptation is also a process of uh the model of the organism
becoming optimized uh decreasing its prediction error so that it can more efficiently extract
free energy from an itch to stay ordered so we get this principle um that all evolutionary
processes are learning processes and all learning processes are evolutionary processes um Conrad
Lorenz a Nobel Prize winning zoologist was also a pioneer of evolutionary epistemology and he made
the statement life is a cognitive process um so if this is true and there's this functional
equivalence between the mechanisms driving evolution learning and science then that implies
that adaptation uh or the genetic information that um uh corresponds to those physical adaptations
are uh equivalent is equivalent to scientific knowledge they're actually the same thing so
to kind of make this relationship clear biological adaptation represents knowledge
of the environment and the knowledge we acquire through learning and science reflects adaptation
to the environment so we see that there's no meaningful distinction between adaptive information
and scientific knowledge both allow life to predict an uncertain world control matter
constrained chaos and we construct order from disorder so the very same property that is responsible
for organic matter leaving the planet in spaceships so this anti-accretion uh is the same uh property
that allows organisms to climb uphill seemingly defying the force of gravity of course uh the laws
of physics aren't violated in any way but uh living systems are not constrained by the laws
of physics through a inanimate systems are so some examples a dolphin stream modern design
which is a product of the information stored in its genome contains the knowledge of hydrodynamics
an eagle's wing design contains the knowledge of aerodynamics not only can we be certain that
engineers see knowledge in these functional structures uh there should be little doubt that
they inspired uh our machines and and without that information I don't think we would have come to
those inventions at least not any time soon um camouflage uh on an organism uh represents
knowledge of the environment so kind of bridging this idea of evolutionary epistemology that
evolution builds up knowledge and that science is an extension of the evolutionary process uh
making a bridge between that and Bayesian inference uh requires this uh relationship between adaptation
and statistical correlation so physicist Carlo Revelli which who has gotten really interested
in explaining how this information that underlies agency that behavior that we see with living
systems gets built up through evolution uh he wrote a great essay it won the foundational
questions institute essay contest um a few years ago but this work was based on the work of David
Wolpert and Artem Kolchinski Artem Kolchinski and basically shows how this adaptation builds up
information in the system that information is really statistical correlation between
the organism and its environment so here's the simplest example it's a bacterium performing
chemotaxis um so bacteria so chemotaxis is basically uh a bacterium will uh swim in the
direction of food and swim away from toxins so basically it's detecting this chemical gradient
that it follows um but so we can see in this example um and this isn't the case for all
species but you can imagine that a bacterium that swims to the left when nutrients are on the left
uh prosperous compared to a bacterium that swims at random um so uh with this behavior
where it's swimming towards food um that is the product of a chance mutation so it's in some sense
it's an accident but when it discovers that solution that organism is more likely to reproduce
so that solution gets retained in the population it gets sort of frozen hardwired in and um
so the process of adaptation is a process that builds up a statistical correlation between
the system the agent and its environment and so that shared correlation represents
mutual information so mutual information is information that's shared between the environment
and the organism and uh just to explain that a little bit more uh this correlation uh basically
as this correlation gets built up it's creating predictive knowledge so um John Maynard Smith
cites Fred Dretsky who did kind of the pioneering work applying Shannon's information theory to
try to quantify evolution so Dretsky argues that if some variable a is correlated with the
second variable b then we can say that b carries information about a for example if the occurrence
of rain is correlated with a particular cloud then the type of cloud tells us whether it would
rain so that's from a great essay called the concept of information biology um so we can see
that you have this little rhyming equation here adaptation equals statistical correlation
equals mutual information and because that uh shared information allows the organism to predict
its environment better this process is also a process of model optimization so the predictive
model of the organism as it adapts starts to become more accurate and so this whole process can be
seen as a free energy minimization process um of course that's information theoretic free energy
it's the free energy of first instance principle we're not talking about thermodynamic free energy
anyone wants to ask a question or gets confused about that let me know but it's basically uh those
things are related and it's something that's not mentioned enough uh minimizing information
theoretic free energy which is just minimizing the prediction error of your model is what allows
the organism to minimize environmental free energy so by acquiring information reducing
the information theoretic free energy allows the organism to extract energy and reduce
thermodynamic free energy it minimizes the free energy and the environment converts it into entropy
so we kind of see how this it's getting into universal Bayesianism as it becomes more correlated
it gains information about its niche and therefore becomes a better predictor of that niche um
so that's what adaptation is it's the genome of the species accumulating information that reduces
the average organism's uncertainty regarding the environment so um the genome is a knowledge
repository of solutions to environmental challenges that allows an organism with no brain and no
mind to anticipate events in the environment so in this theory as I mentioned before consciousness
comes later it comes with self-modeling capacity and a bacterium would be kind of a zombie agent
it would have agency and it would move with purpose but that is not enough for mind or at
least mind defined as consciousness uh if you want to say that mind is just information processing
then yes there is mind in these systems but that's very different than saying that the system has a
subjective experience uh in a first person perspective that will come in the next talk but
that uh it's it's harder um so that information stored in memory is integrated into a statistical
or predictive model that determines the causal control system's behavioral repertoire or the full
range of behaviors an organism is capable of and it is this mapping of sensory inputs to motor
outputs that makes the organism move in ways that we normally associate with mind or consciousness
um crawlferston in a great eon article says all biological processes can be construed as
performing some form of inference I think I already read that um but the free energy principle
for those aren't familiar um we've already explained it but the Bayesian brain hypothesis
and the free energy principle are the same thing uh the difference is that the free energy principle
applies to all other adaptive systems where the other one is just focusing on brains but
friston realized that this you know is a model and a process that applies to any system that's
trying to resist the tendency towards disorder so any system to stay to continue persisting
longer than we would expect uh naturally it must engage in Bayesian like learning to deal with
environment uncertainty how much time do I have left roughly uh still more than enough
okay keep going um I'm definitely more than half through I'd say I'm two-thirds of the way through
so uh John Campbell has this great uh paper called universal Darwinism as a process of
Bayesian inference that I kept coming across as I was trying to understand uh non-equilibrium
thermodynamics and information theory um yeah I should say actually I should have
got in the books uh showed you each book but um there's a great book called the origin and nature
of life on earth by uh Santa Fe Institute's Eric Smith and Harold Morowitz uh Morowitz was a professor
of mine Eric uh is a friend that uh we would have these foundations of the mine uh guild it was
like a consciousness club that would meet at the Krasnow Institute where I got my PhD and um so their
book the origin of life on the origin of life in chapter eight actually gets into this information
theory and uh this this Bayesian inference and describes the origin of life and the evolution
of life as a process of Bayesian model selection and so that was kind of what connected
non-equilibrium statistical mechanics to these to this Bayesian brain hypothesis
and I realized that you know these theories were kind of converging on the same ideas so
John Campbell wrote this paper in 2016 he says Bayesian inference is an algorithm for the accumulation
of evidence-based knowledge this algorithm is now seen to operate over a wide range of evolutionary
processes including natural selection the evolution of mental models and cultural evolutionary
processes notably including science itself so uh when we say that evolution is a process of
Bayesian model selection in the book I mentioned with Eric and Morowitz actually characterized
evolution as an inference engine uh we're basically saying that when organisms that aren't fit get
weeded out uh that's basically models that aren't predictive getting eliminated so the organisms
that persist are the models that were able to predict the environment best so inference and
prediction are kind of the same thing uh since the word inference is a little obscure I guess um so
just to make this point a little more clear um since nature is complex and intrinsically unpredictable
uh the model of an organism is at some point guaranteed to fail when reality surprises it
with the unexpected so and that's what the free energy principle is about minimizing surprise is
the same thing as minimizing prediction error so an organism gets eaten by a predator a baby
fails to reach his bottle a scientific theory fails to explain new data um basically when any of
these things happens it means that the model used to predict reality is not completely accurate
it contains a certain amount of prediction error needs to be corrected so what's the solution
try something new the old model worked well enough up to that point so don't ditch it just
vary it a bit and see if it performs better if it does not reduce surprise eliminate that variant
and try again if prediction error is reduced replace the old model with the new one so that
it becomes the reigning theory and the design template for new variants to be based upon
when a model has been updated in this way due to natural selection adaptive learning or
experimental testing we can say that knowledge has been acquired and environmental uncertainty reduced
so here we have an image um I should say that uh infinity maps uh German software mapping company
helped me create these images uh Oliver Wan I have to uh do a big thanks to him um this image
has a little bit more going on than I would want right now but you could see that um basically
this represents two different mechanisms for uh learning and adaptation so this one on the top
that we're going to talk about first is the normal uh competitive evolution sort of Darwinian
survival of the fittest while this mechanism over here is the mechanism of self-organization
so let's first talk about the normal type of evolution we're familiar with and show that
how this process of evolution that works through variation and selection actually
uh generates predictive information and uh creates a model which is uh which encodes knowledge
of the biologically relevant regularities in the environment so first we have this
this is a bacterium over here and so this is the simplest model um you have an organism
that's an embodied theory or a best guess about how to stay far from equilibrium
so evolutionary epistemology sees organisms themselves as embodied theories so evolution
is basically testing these different models so uh it basically reproduces and we know that
because there are going to be errors in uh in that process uh the genome will get changed
slightly and you will get a generation of progeny that all are slightly different
they have slightly different configurations um some of these configurations will be better
at extracting energy and predicting the environment than others and the ones that uh
aren't good at predicting the environment they get filtered out by natural selection
so here we see design four is the winning design because it's the best predictor and it's the best
predictor because it's the best extractor of energy and so that uh design uh that that organism
gets to reproduce and then you have another generation uh of designs that are slightly
different and this process is an iterative process just like science and hypothesis testing so
over generations you will start to get uh designs that are better adapted to the environment
which we've explained means that they will be more correlated with the environment
and being more correlated means being a better predictor um so the knowledge that's left over
after this process is the adaptive information stored in genetic material that reduces
environmental uncertainty and you see that this process will ultimately lead to the evolution
towards the the best possible design so it's it's an optimization a lot of people don't think
that evolution is optimizing anything there's been this you know kind of philosophy that
evolution does just good enough but we actually see that in terms of the computation that it
does to stay far from equilibrium that it's actually optimized for being almost maximally
efficient with its use of energy it approaches something close to what's called the land hour
limit which david will put at sfi is written about but uh life is much more efficient uh
with computation in terms of energy uh supply needed compared to all of our technology so the
human brain can do uh solve problems that even our bests like ai systems can't solve and it does
so running on uh the equivalent of one household light bulb so we'll come back to this self
organization process oh well actually we'll get into that right now so this is the normal uh
process that we think about when we think about evolution generating knowledge predictive knowledge
and so that's called phylogenetic learning uh phylogenetic refers to these like generations so
the learning is generational the organisms don't really learn because they don't have brains they
not able to update their model in real time so learning is at the level of the population
and for learning to occur organisms have to die before brains basically you have to have this uh
competition uh for there to be a learning process however there's also self organization when these
organisms don't compete but actually find a configuration find it discover a collective
configuration through their somewhat random interactions with each other and when they
find this collective configuration through trial and error um basically the configurations
that are better at extracting energy will be the ones that are retained um so
Donald Campbell father of evolutionary epistemology uh explain this process this evolutionary process
by which self organization works as blind variation and selective retention
or we can think of it as selection for persistence or stability so fitness kind of there's a
Dawkins quote I think I come out where Richard Dawkins said Darwin's uh survival of the fittest
is really um just uh more specific instance of a more general law of survival of the stable
so when we think about being fit at the beginning we're talking about just being uh stable being
able to find energy if you can't do that it doesn't matter whether you have agents that you're
competing with or not because if you can't get energy it doesn't matter if there are other people
competing for it that you won't survive so you don't need replication with variation to evolve
that's what this is this model is saying um and Stuart Kauffman from the Santa Fe Institute has
been talking about the importance of this marriage between Darwinian evolution and
self-organization but basically uh because there's not this replication process um this is how
evolution occurs so you have a system that's a collection of components parts these parts can be
molecules or they could be agents and when these molecules are pushed far from equilibrium by a
flow of energy of course humans are eating food and metabolizing energy so they're being powered
by energy flows as well the system blindly explores various configurations in the space of
possible designs via trial and error so this system will move through a series of configurations
and those configurations that allow the system to extract sufficient energy to stay out of equilibrium
will get retained while the configurations that don't allow for energy extraction will
will get filtered out either the system will collapse and have to try a new configuration um
or it'll just revert to the the previous stable uh configuration and it will continue
trying to explore that configuration space um I should have said like here's a good example
like here's a depiction of this configuration space we're talking about life exploring the design
space so basically you have a designer configuration and then uh you get these uh different this
exploration of different configurations that are very close to the configuration you started out with
so you know I was thinking about giving a talk on the origin of life but I couldn't get into all
this cool Bayesian stuff that's what the first part of the book is about what's really interesting
is that we're finding that self-organization as mentioned is a Darwinian process so there's actually
a name for this dissipative adaptation and it shows that this evolution towards these more
stable configurations dissipate more energy when this happens at the level of organisms that we're
talking about it shouldn't be surprising that it dissipates more energy because basically
as the organism evolves to be better at extracting energy all that energy it's extracting to maintain
far from equilibrium is being converted into thermal entropy so all self-organizing processes
are really dissipative adaptation processes at different levels so this process philosophers
would say is multiply realizable so this process can happen at different scales and that's exactly
what we see like right here the same process so you would have like a society like exploring
different governance systems and it doesn't know which government system is going to work
the best the forehand it tries it if it doesn't work well like the fall of Rome
it will collapse and then it will reassemble
so
just to wrap up the origin of life so we have this process of dissipative adaptation and if it's
being pushed by the flow of energy and it's doing this process here where it's finding increasingly
stable configurations collective configurations then
basically what will emerge is an autocatalytic set we'll define that later but basically
it's I'm losing a lot of terms from philosophy I was going to say like and
it's the beginning of an auto poetic agent so like a self-maintaining agent
and simplest form is a chemical system that produces outputs which are then
fed back into the system so that the system can self-amplify it's basically creating
all of the molecules that it needs to grow and it's thought that this process
you know occurred the autocatalytic set is kind of the precursor for the first cell
so it's kind of like a proto cell and it was thought to occur around hydrothermal vents which
are underwater volcanoes there's all this energy flowing up from the the the hot core running
through geochemical energy and there's these rocky pores in the rocks around hydrothermal vents which
provides something like a membrane like a lipid
membrane to hold the components in a Markov blanket so the the pores in the rocks
were the Markov blanket for the autocatalytic set and Eric Smith and Morowitz showed that
basically feeding off inorganic inputs like carbon molecules like not anything
not organic chemistry where it's like life but just like simple like carbon hydrogen and oxygen
feeding off those inputs basically the metabolic process it's called the reverse grab cycle so
that process allowed the first autocatalytic set to continuously self-amplify through this
through this process so if this process is allowed to continue further self-organization
may eventually lead to the emergence of an organic computer that can process integrate and
store information about the world so what dissipative adaptation is doing is uh as it's doing this
blind variation and selective retention process and it's finding more stable configurations
those more stable configurations are also predictive of the environment so this dissipative
adaptation process is this autocatalytic set modeling the surrounding energy landscape so
i'm arguing that this is where modeling begins it even begins before what we call life like
self replicating life and it's dissipative adaptation which is a process of modeling the
the energy in the environment the energy sources um so uh this isn't just one continuous process
there are these leaps that are phase transitions basically we've heard of phase transitions and
physics and chemistry courses where you have like
water being heated up and then transitioning into a gas or the reverse when a gas becomes frozen
uh you get a state of order that emerges um these transitions towards uh these configurations
that are good at extracting energy those uh have also been characterized as phase transitions
so eric smith who i mentioned before and Harold Morowitz they have this phase transition theory
of life which basically uh explains how um information gains control in these systems
and sarah walker and paul davies work on this basically show that through this process
the blind variation and selective retention information gets built up in this autocatalytic
set and at some point there's what they call algorithmic takeover uh or informational control
and the system becomes an agent that can start to steer and control itself uh in ways that wouldn't
be predicted by physics so a living system is very much like we didn't talk about dissipative
structures but like tornadoes warples those things emerge to dissipate an energy gradient
living things uh because of the process of metabolism we are this cycling system this
thermodynamic energetic loop um uh but uh what's it gonna say about that um
so yeah we are like the storm but we do have control over the storm we're a storm with control
so it doesn't really make sense going back to sam harris's quote that you are the storm you do
not control it it's literally the information that gets built up through evolution that allows
you know us being this dissipative structure like a storm to start controlling its own behavior
um so the last part is just an argument for that second question why should complexity increase
um we know that this evolutionary process where you build up this model
uh so we would think that this after these generations of evolution this organism is
going to be well adapted to its environment but we know that adaptation doesn't mean becoming
more complex always so sharks and crocodiles are cited as species that haven't evolved much at all
in many millions of years um cave fish actually evolved to become more simple so basically fish
with eyes got isolated in like an underground environment where there was no uh need for
sunlight and uh so basically um fish like processing light like eyes didn't have any
survival advantage so um basically fish lost their eyes uh over many generations of evolution
becoming simpler so if that's true why should evolution increase complexity um the answer to
that it comes from this understanding that evolutionary epistemology says that a species
adapting to a niche is like a scientific theory being tested for viability the species will evolve
not to become increasingly complex but to match the complexity of the environment a sort of simplest
solution to the thermodynamic problem of staying far from equilibrium so i'm signed famous we said
a theory should be as simple as possible but no simpler the same could be said about an organism
you want it to be as simple as possible while it accomplishes its task of extracting energy
it has to be complex enough to be able to extract energy in a competitive environment
but a bacterium doesn't have to do it doesn't need intelligence any extra information processing
higher level cognition would be energy wasted um that could be energy that allows it to stay
far from equilibrium for longer and replicate more so um it's not the case that everything
will evolve towards higher complexity uh but the reason that we do get increasingly complex
species over evolutionary time in a way that i'm saying is inevitable uh so there is a progressive
evolutionary process that leads to higher forms it has to do with uh niche emergence so so basically
a species will evolve to become as complex as its niche as its environmental niche
but there will be increasingly complex niches that emerge uh for reasons that will be explained
um but i will pause there uh before i get to that which will be what we end on
there are no other questions right now so if anyone does have questions how about they can
feel free to ask it during this last section give you a second to catch your breath i know it's been
a ton of information like my goal is that you know since this is being recorded it'll be something
that's up um hopefully i've cited enough literature that people can explore this stuff themselves
and see that like okay it's not this guy that's like uh coo claiming to have like a theory of
everything this isn't my theory it's a synthesis that's emerging and um uh really the story has
been there for quite some time and the cybernetics pioneers actually a lot of them were you could call
them like cosmic teleologists a lot of them did see this continual increase in complexity
of course there's nothing mystical about it or supernatural about it um it's a mechanistic
process that doesn't change the fact that nature seems to have these built-in goals that emerge from
the fundamental laws and constants the parameters the fine-tuning um but it's a completely natural
progressive teleological evolutionary process and so i'll just end you know this is just
finishing up it's along the same line so that's good questions can come after this
i know it's been quite a lot so i will just try to sum this up simply um so uh two important
principles from cybernetics these came from ross ashby who also created the principle of
self-organization which was really the first time people took self-organization seriously so
we think of complexity science as being the science of self-organization but it really
goes back to cybernetics um i think the term i think khan might have talked about it but it was
ross ashby who tried to you know give it a make it a a principle and a formalized concept
so there are these two concepts that really i think anybody interested in like carl firston's
basing brain hypothesis free energy principle should be aware of because all of the way he talks
about like evolution comes from this ashby's work um the good regulator theorem it was also
updated there there was the internal model principle which came like a decade later good
regulator theorem came these both these laws i think came in the 50s and the 40s or 50s and then
i think in the 70s the internal model principle was created but it basically says that any system
that regulates or controls another system must have a model of that system otherwise it can't
regulate it so it seems pretty obvious but this talk of models kind of starts here that that is
very familiar to like anyone interested in like the free energy principle so this this can be applied
to inanimate systems i mean controllers are like house like thermostats and stuff but ashby was
really interested in adaptive systems so he was thinking about evolution so applied to evolution
an organism must model its environment uh if it's going to extract free energy uh and an organism
is a model of its niche like a key is a model of the lock it opens so when we talk about these
models it can be kind of extract kind of abstract but i think this model like a key is a model of
the lock it opens really explains how an organism fits into a niche uh you could also say like a
hand fits into a glove but it really uh the organism is a model of its environment so
natural selection is essentially an information channel that through evolution is pumping in
information from the external world from the environment into the organism such that the
organism is encoding the structure of reality encoding the structure of the world and its design
include uh encodes information about the outside world so it's kind of a new way to think about
evolution is this process of basically the universe is modeling itself and waking up through this
process it's pretty interesting um kind of psychedelic so um the law recommends it variety
is just telling you about the sophistication of that model so how complex does the model have to be
for the organism to stay far from equilibrium um ross ashby's law says
so john noughton researcher at Cambridge uh kind of summed it up this way in colloquial terms
ashby's law has come to be understood as a simple proposition if the system is to be able to deal
successfully with the diversity of challenges that its environment produces then it needs to
have a repertoire of responses which is at least as nuanced as the problems thrown up by the
environment so a viable system is one that can handle the variability of its environment or as
ashby put it only variety can absorb variety so it's what we said before with evolutionary
epistemology an organism evolves to become as complex as its environmental niche requires
it has to specifically have enough behavioral responses which map on to internal states so
it has to have enough cognitive states to respond to the number of challenges that the environment
presents challenges um in its ability to extract energy and when when you get organisms and you get
other uh you get other agents other organisms then of course what the organism has to model
is much more complicated because it doesn't have to just model the energy source in its environment
like to get food it also has to model other modelers other cognitive agents um so yeah basically
any adaptive system has uh a behavioral repertoire and a repertoire of accessible mental states or
for things without brains computational states and the number of states that the organism can access
uh should match the number of challenges the number of states that could surprise the organism
by the environment um so a cat must have at least as many states as the ways the mouse can evade it
and the mouse has to have enough behavioral states to get away so they model each other
a swordsman like a fincer must have many blocks as his opponent has attacks and as we said
because behavioral responses map on to unique internal states the loss of an organism must have
as many accessible states as required by the complexity of the niche so we already said this
organism is some simplest solution to the thermodynamic problem of staying far from equilibrium
so a well-adapted species represents a biological solution to an existential thermodynamic
dilemma it's a sort of living evolving scientific theory about how to most efficiently extract the
free energy the lifeblood of existence out of a particular niche some niches present a changing
variety of challenges that must be adapted to you while others present hardly any at all
so almost done here I know it's a lot um hopefully this can kind of wrap up the ideas
and kind of show how they're all connected um but this is still on this question of how complex
is the universe uh how complex can it get so Olivia Judson wrote this uh
published this paper called the energy expansions of evolution it's really nice people should check it
out uh so she says the history of the earth life earth system can be divided into five energetic
epochs each featuring the evolution of life forms that can exploit a new source of energy these
sources are geochemical energy sunlight oxygen flesh and fire the first two are present at the
start but oxygen flesh and fire all consequences of evolutionary events and then she makes this
statement by the way red is quotes if people haven't uh figured that out so these are her words
I forgot to put quote marks um so no category of energy sources disappeared this has over time
resulted in an expanding realm of the sources of energy available to living organisms and a
con commitment uh increase in the diversity and complexity of ecosystems so here's the way to
think about it um so taking the thermodynamic perspective and looking at organisms as energy
flow channels uh we can think of each niche on earth as a sort of energy slot for a given
species and an evolving population of organisms efficiently searching the solution space will
eventually just by chance discover a solution to a thermodynamic problem that it didn't know
existed the discovery of a novel energy source or energy extraction technique is both how a new
niche and a new species come into existence so phylogenetic learning which we saw in that
chart will naturally lead to speciation because organisms will stumble upon new ways to exploit
thermodynamic niches that were previously inaccessible to life purely for design reasons
we're going to give examples on the next slide um so as the biosphere accumulates knowledge
through phylogenetic learning not only is the solution space corresponding to one kind of
thermodynamic problem being explored there's a growing problem space each with its own unique
solution space um so in an evolution so there's an evolutionary trajectory that's not determined
in the strict sense uh envisioned by Laplace where like there's no freedom in the future is
like set in stone but there is a sort of statistical determinism what i've been calling a non-equilibrium
statistical determinism that guarantees that basically the inevitability of this emergence
of a distribution of far from equilibrium attractors a varying varying degrees of complexity so each
species can be seen as a an attractor that's exploiting this niche and you get this uh basically
this diversity where you have uh organisms uh exploiting like the the energy niches that were
kind of the easy ones to exploit on earth like the geochemical free energy we mentioned with
the origin of life and then sunlight was a little bit of a more difficult challenge to
extract sunlight it took some time for evolution to be able to do that um so uh extracting energy
from the hydrothermal vents uh source of energy is really simple because the energy is already
like flowing through the system it doesn't have to do much work to extract sunlight you have you
know a moving sun it's a little bit more complicated but not nearly as complicated as organisms that
eat other organisms so heterotrophic organisms um because they will have to model not just like a
sun moving predictably through the air but have to model all these other agents many of which are
trying to eat them to kill you um so basically so answering this question why increasingly
intelligent species emerge we started off with reductive autotrophs those organisms around
hydrothermal vents they were a solution to the problem of how to extract free energy from geochemical
gradients um photosynthetic bacteria the ancestors of plants were the solution to extract of how to
extract all the solar energy that was flowing through the planetary system so that was a big
discovery made by life is that you can get energy directly from sunlight heterotrophic
organisms organisms that eat other organisms were the solution to the problem of how to
extract energy from life itself once life starts having to model life other agents with causal
power and adaptive behavior the computational task of extracting free energy gets increasingly
difficult as increasingly complex species arise so by virtue of having to model each other the
complexity of some species gets ratcheted up by what's known as an evolutionary arms race so the
lion is evolving you know well lions are producing offspring some of those lions will be better at
predicting the gazelle's movements the gazelle will also be creating offspring and some of those
will be better at predicting the lion's attack the ones that are better predicting are the ones that
get to uh stick around so you see how you have this ratcheting mechanism that ratchets that
ratchets its complexity there's actually a principle called the red queen principle
that says that for an organism to simply stay in the game of existence certain organisms
a certain species they will have to become increasingly complex and that comes from
uh alice in wonderland basically uh there's a scene with the red queen and alices they're
they're all running as fast as they can and alice is like you know i'm running fast as i i keep
running but i'm i'm going nowhere like so they're they're all running but they're they're not making
any distance they're staying in place and the queen says something like oh you see here for that
uh to go somewhere you'll have to run much faster than that um so the idea is that for a species
that has to deal with this complex environment just to stay where it is just to stay in the
game of existence it has to become increasingly complex it has to keep adapting so one thing
that i wanted to get into more but i'm not going to is this idea of empowerment it comes from the
computational neuroscience literature it's similar it comes from daniel pilani but it's very similar
to harvard's uh alex wissner vizner gross he has an idea called causal entropic forcing but
basically these people are arguing that um well vizner gross is arguing that a causal entropic force
means that like basically with like evolution you'll get a system systems that uh are trying to
maximize the number of states they can respond to so the maximize and the number of states they
can respond to is mirrored by their internal diversity so systems naturally try to increase
the number of states and it's this ability that allows for intelligence because if you have more
states going back to this law of requisite variety you can respond to more challenges so not every
species is increasing empowerment but you will get the emergence of increasing uh increasingly
complex uh species because uh each species uh serves as food for a potential new species um
you will get increasingly complex species that emerge over time and they will be increasingly
empowered meaning that they can respond to more environmental states and that they have more
accessible mental or cognitive states um i explained some of this in the last
slide but i'll just explain a little more so open-ended niche emergence why is the evolutionary
record shown a trend of the emergence of increasingly complex forms um because when all conceivable
niches on earth were filled that wasn't the end new species created new niches because the free
energy slot they provide is themselves their food so cybernetics guy he's kind of like the last
living cybernet assist kind of um i'm sure there are other people that call themselves that but
he's kind of kept that title even when it like wasn't trendy um he says is well documented by
evolutionary biologists that ecosystems tend to become more complex the number of different
species increases and the number of dependencies and other linkages linkages between species
increases he cites eo wilson who recently passed away um who did a lot of work that that kind of
inspired a lot of the concepts in the book um not just this niche emergence but also talking about
super organisms so collectives like ant colonies and self-organizing systems at all scales but he
said not only do ecosystems contain typically lots of niches that will eventually be filled
by new species but there is a self-reinforcing tendency to create new niches what does that mean
it means uh the biosphere uh certainly ecosystems are themselves autocatalytic sets
so sethloid he's talking about these chemical autocatalytic sets but it's i should have had
this on the earlier slide but it'll be a good way to kind of show the equivalence between ecosystems
sethloids as autocatalytic sets of reactions are powerful systems in addition to computing they
can produce a wide variety of chemical outputs in effect an autocatalytic set of reactions is
like a tiny computer controlled factory for producing chemicals some of these chemicals
are the constituents of life now steward coughman big you know one of the main names who's kind of
this whole talk he's kind of put these ideas out there uh since like the early 90s well actually
going back farther than that but he started writing books in the 90s and really gaining
exposure for the Santa Fe Institute uh he's written a recent paper well semi-recent um
about uh niche emergence as an autocatalytic process so ecosystems are autocatalytic
autocatalytically closed self-sustaining reaction networks so they're autopoietic agents that reliably
drive up biological diversity and complexity as they self-amplify and evolve so when you think
about it really all integrated networks of adaptive systems function as autocatalytic sets
there's been a lot of papers showing this economies in a sense are autocatalytic sets including the
social organisms we call societies or civilizations um so these networks are common because they
emerge spontaneously when many organisms repeatedly interact with one another and discover
synergistic collective configurations as nature often pressures them to do so we're at the end
almost uh we've explained why complexity increases uh evolution will not increase the complexity
of every species they will become adapted to their niche they will match the complexity of the niche
however because new niches are always emerging because species act as food for a potential new
species um because of that process you will get this increase uh you will get species that emerge
that have a higher number of a larger repertoire of mental and behavioral states so the law of
requisite variety really explains why more complex environments create more complex niches and this
is open-ended there's really no uh limit to how far this process can go especially since humans
who are the pinnacle of this process we're not you know a lot of people have been against these
kinds of views because it seems like it's saying that humans are superior we're superior maybe
computationally but not superior in any other sense we're actually part of the biosphere
which is this integrated interconnected system so it's really you know it doesn't make sense to
think of us as like superior to nature because the whole biosphere is an organism that we're just
sort of an organ for uh we're basically the nervous system of the planet the cybernetic
global system that people have called Gaia some people don't like that name I think it's a perfectly
good name but um that's why uh complexity gets ratcheted up but the final um uh I guess uh part
of of this complexity increased story is that not only do you get increasingly complex species uh
those species will interact naturally to form higher level uh adaptive systems which are
collectives so um I call this the principle of recursive self-organization based on Ashby's
principle of self-organization what I'm arguing is that when you have a biosphere with these
agents and you have some are simple and some are complex naturally those agents will interact
when they interact they will uh in many cases discover synergistic collective configurations
so configurations that make it easier for each agent to extract the energy they need to stay
far from equilibrium so why do interacting agents link up to form stable holes for the
exact same reason that molecules with the right chemical diversity will form stable
autocatalytic reaction sets when pushed by a flow of energy working collectively allows the whole
system to extract more free energy with less work we can that's the whole point of synergy
is that working together makes your workload easier because there's a distribution of labor
and it's it's really nice um that you know this uh distribution of species with some
simple and some complex uh that's really what you need to create this like uh cybernetic
adaptive system at the level of a planet because a system uh needs diversity among its components
in structure and function for there to be this distribution of labor labor which makes it this
collective whole this this synergistic holistic unit um so it's actually good that evolution
in adaptation isn't increasing this the complexity of each species like each species isn't becoming
intelligent like roaches aren't becoming like more and more intelligent over time with no limit
the biosphere wouldn't be stable if that were the case uh it's really uh ecosystems need this
diversity among components just as a car with made of all engines isn't going to be functional
or our organism made of all brains you need a variety of parts some simple some complex because
they all do different functions um so nature promotes cooperation collaboration and synergy
because it is thermodynamically beneficial for all parties um synergistic collective configurations
will eventually be discovered by many component systems that are exploring various states or
configurations through the blind variation and selective retention mechanism mentioned organisms
only compete until they finally figure out what that working together makes everyone's task easier
and that goes for humans too so it's kind of a moral lesson for everybody the nations have to
work together we shouldn't um get rid of the nations there shouldn't just be this evolution
into this like global government because the nations are actually uh provide this diversity
that we're saying is important uh because you need this uh diversity of component parts to create
a division of labor so there's strength in diversity this is different than the evolutionary
picture of survival of the fittest whereas there's just like this idea that the stronger the most
intelligent survive this is saying that that's not true it's the most adaptive that survive has
nothing to do with strength or intelligence sloths have been around for many millions of years despite
being sloths being slow uh because they exploit uh source of free energy that's not being exploited
by another uh species so um going back to this kind of global message you want nations to retain
their identities but you also want them at the same time to come together and to work synergistically
so you basically want something like a global system but this there has to be the optimal
balance between centralization and decentralization um neither approach will be good on its own
there needs to be this balance so um as long as the biosphere is creating a growing variety of
complex adaptive systems some of those will interact to produce higher level complex adaptive
systems which will come together to form even larger ones this process continues uh at higher
scales so i didn't go into this left out a kind of a neat picture that shows a brain and then the
planet and it's like information networks but uh i do i i hope that you know talk about gaya and
global brain will become uh will be taken as seriously as it should be uh they really only
weren't taken seriously because there were mystical notions associated with this word gaya
which wasn't even james uh love locks uh fault he act the name gaya came from his neighbor
who is actually the author of lord of the flies boim golden so blame him for the for the flowery
metaphor with gaya um but yeah the the biosphere is a cybernetic organism and we are forming
something like the global brain and a self replicating biosphere uh is essentially
the next step and when we are trying to care for planets like mars that can be seen as the
biosphere replicating uh for humans to at this point in our stage of development we would have
to kind of convert mars to like a something like a biosphere to have like oxygen and so
you can see how it's replication with variation you get the same sort of thing but because it's
a different planet there's going to be a variation it's not going to be exactly the same but that's
how the evolutionary process continues i should show this earlier this is just showing how like
eukaryotic single celled organisms like amoebas will come together to form communities like a
slime mold uh these multi cellular organisms come together to form colonies you see this
ant colony ants actually really do form a superorganism you can see here they actually
build a bridge out of their bodies so that some ants can like climb across that bridge so it really
makes sense to call it a superorganism or at least like a super adaptive system or like a meta
meta system um because without it we can't make sense of this collective behavior that's functional
of course human civilization the again seed is hierarchy now it makes more sense we see that
these evolutionary transitions oh yeah these are called evolutionary transitions sometimes i use the
name meta system transition because um if we were talking about the brain i would also talk about
like the emergence of a prefrontal cortex which is like a high level controller um that's also
like a meta system transition so meta system transitions are a little extend this where it's
not talking necessarily about evolutionary transitions but these other transitions where
systems start to model themselves um so here we see uh how evolution has created these
different memory systems these knowledge repositories so it's that process of recursive
self-organization that creates new memory systems when you get go from single cell life to multi
cellular life to life with brains uh it's uh these are revolutions in information storage
machinery so you can see how the information in the biosphere gets accumulated through an
evolutionary process um these are the final points yeah so knowledge is powers not just
the hollow buzz phrase of the digital age it's true in the most fundamental way uncertainty
information is life's first and last weapon in ongoing war with disorder without knowledge
life cannot exist for more than a moment much less colonize the galaxy and beyond this suggests
it's sitting out in the path toward cosmic superiority it's not a choice that intelligent
agents like homo sapiens make upon careful reflection nor is it just some quirky ambition
we somewhat answered by chance this is the main point humanities collective desire to transcend
mortality and expand outward into space so apparent from our current scientific and technological
endeavors space x uh this doesn't emerge as an accident this is inevitable consequence of the
fact that continual knowledge acquisition is a fundamental biological imperative if life wants
to persist and stay far from equilibrium at some point it has to get off the planet because the sun
is uh going to die and uh it's these sorts of problems these existential problems which
create progress because it's our awareness of this problem which uh forces us to
search the configuration space for the solutions that solve the problem so it's natural selection
points information from the inanimate world into life nature begins modeling itself encoding
its own structure and the universe begins to wake up we are the cosmos come alive not metaphorically
but literally this is Ray Kurzweil's uh image from his book this hilarity is near you can see that
he sees this he calls this the the destiny of of life in the universe and he's not shy about
using that word um again it's not determined in the strict sense of replace this uh kind of a
statistical determinism that creates these uh series of attractors and um
you've seen famous people uh so you know some people see that idea and they'll have been
reading brian green and listening to all these reductionists and think that's not a scientific
view well uh that's not true and um i hope to see more of these people speaking out about it so
Christoph Koch in confessions of a romantic reductionist says the rise of sentient life
within times wide circuit was inevitable teal hard day shard in we really came up with this don't
have time to talk about him french philosopher in jezzouette you should look into is correct in his
view that the islands within the universe if not the whole cosmos are evolving toward ever
greater complexity and self-knowledge to be clear he's not saying that earth had to bear life that
you know primates had to walk to the african godslands but he says i do believe that the
laws of physics overwhelmingly favored the emergence of consciousness the universe is a
work in progress such a belief evokes jeri Jeremy at an island for many biologists and
philosophers but the evidence from cosmology biology and history is compelling so there's
some uh advanced blurbs for this book uh if you want to pre-order it um it comes out in june
but every order that i get from now until then will count towards my first week sales total
so that will help me get on best sellers list if you want to pre-order it now and you email me um
i will send you a copy soon of this novel i also wrote called road to omega i was pretty busy in the
last five years yeah i went into a cave for like four or five years but this uh is a vehicle for
the science and philosophy in the book kind of like an anti-iron rand at the shrug maybe the
opposite philosophy um and the road to omega sub-stack kind of turns this philosophy into
kind of an effort to um save the world with uh science epistemology and blockchain technology
uh blockchains are part of this self-organization process and that's the longest talk i've ever
given that's the longest i've ever talked at one time probably my wife will probably say
that's not true but i'm tired so let's uh open it up to questions and thank you for your immense
patience it's awesome to hear and think about it so there are two questions in the chat first is
from dean dean asks how would we explain caring through a lens of free will or no free will would
free will deniers say there's no caring when it appears that agents can or do fully care
yeah so great question um unfortunately i don't have much to say without saying the things that
i was going to bring up in the next talk really explaining what free will is i guess i should
just say right now uh kind of a brief explanation of what i mean by free will so i hope i've made
the argument that agency emerges uh in adaptive systems that start off as biological organisms
and um to the person that's self-driving car thing i uh just to mention that real quick
i don't think they're agents but i do think uh it's possible to create systems with agency
for reasons that i haven't gone into um it seems important that the systems have a certain type
of architecture so not like a standard computer as a von Neumann architecture and it's not
distributed and integrated in the way the brain is so it's not integrating much information so
these systems won't have causal power they won't be agents um so uh neuromorphic hardware has been
a lot of people think that's going to allow machines that can think and perhaps even be conscious
um i think maybe that's the way to go uh it's probably a lot more complicated than that that's
a step in the right direction so agency is real it's uh due to information gaining causal power
in a system and starts uh it starts steering the system so you'll see like a bacterium performing
chemotaxis but does it make sense to say that the bacterium has free will when it's going this way
and that just because it's not predictable in the way an inanimate system is so i would say that
they have agency but they don't have free will what uh free will is and it's not my idea other
people have kind of been talking in this way kevin michael uh has a book neurogeneticist uh
he's coming out with a book called agents which is all about agency and free will but um the idea is
that we are agents with causal power but um we're sort of uh where um our responses like
are basically uh programmed responses uh that are responses that occur um automatically uh that
are informed by this uh information that's been built up through evolution and adaptive learning
so a lot of the time we go through the day and we're not really thinking about things like
driving or like waking up and like you know going to the fridge we're not putting conscious thought
into that so that wouldn't seem to be free will uh to me you're you're kind of acting on autopilot
so what free will is is uh a higher level of control that emerges with something like a
prefrontal cortex in a global workspace basically free will allow uh a prefrontal cortex allows an
agent to override its uh instinctive and automatic behaviors um and so free will is something that uh
that we have but only if we're exercising this higher level of control it's associated with
cognitive control or executive control effortful control and basically um if you have a healthy
functioning prefrontal cortex uh you're going to basically the conscious mind is monitoring
consciousness is a monitor uh so it's it's monitoring uh your behaviors and if it uh
detects that there's suboptimal behavior for whatever reason like it's just automatic kind of
instinctual let's say someone says something that makes us angry and we respond immediately
with like pushing them or something uh that's not a wise move and that maybe may happen when we're
fearful because of the amygdala response and we just have this automatic behavior um but uh free
will would be when uh the conscious mind overrides that process and uh labette actually the free will
studies that everybody cites as saying that we don't have free will he actually never said that
he said free will is in this veto power like maybe some of our voluntary movements occur without
conscious thought but it's our ability to override those movements uh that is the source of free will
but there was more problems with that actually um the studies have
coped it a study showing that uh basically um
that free will um uh readiness potential which is like a spike in electrical activity that occurs
before you do this voluntary movement this movement we think is voluntary and everyone thought that
this meant that you're not really making a conscious decision that you could see this
spike in brain activity earlier than the person thought they made the voluntary voluntary decision
but a new study has shown that that's only the case when we're making like arbitrary decisions
and when they had people making a decision about when what went to donate like a large
amount of money to a charity you actually saw this readiness potential disappear and so it seems
like deliberate thinking which is still this like prefrontal cortex and there's this distinction
between access access consciousness and phenomenal consciousness that i didn't go into that i would
in the next talk that adam saffron and integrated world modern theory really gets at but the idea
is that the prefrontal cortex does allow us to override automatic behaviors and that is a sort
of freedom that we have and we also lose it uh in case of schizophrenia you see impaired uh
prefrontal cortex activity and drug addicts you see impaired activity um in drug drug addicts
you see they do repetitive behavior even when they know that it's uh not beneficial to them
they will still engage in that so they're kind of stuck in this loop for this unhealthy attractor
with schizophrenia there's patients that report being pushed around by forces that are beyond
their control uh i think that's because when the prefrontal cortex is uh basically deactivated um
people lose this sense this ability to override their automatic behaviors and i think that's what
those people are experiencing is sort of loss of this higher level agency that we've called free will
another interesting just the final interesting thing to mention about that is a cotard's syndrome
a cotard's delusion is this delusion where people think they're dead they think they're
like ghost or just not alive it's really weird a lot of people die from starvation
because they think they don't have to eat because they think they're already dead
you actually see from neuroimaging studies they've showed uh like impaired activity in the
prefrontal cortex so maybe these people who think they're dead have lost this high level agency and
they feel like they're ghosts or something um as far as caring uh so um caring is a part of like
emerged through evolution because you do have this benefit to cooperating with each other
this self-organization process that we talked about that happens naturally because
basically you find that when you work together you minimize conflicts and um
uh align it you align interest and so caring altruism empathy all of those things are as natural
uh and as Darwinian as anything else but you have to add on to evolutionary theory all of this
stuff about self-organization and cooperative evolution um as far as he said he said something
about why people uh who uh don't believe in free will I forget the exact point about the caring
what was that um when when it appears that agents can or do fully care
but sorry what was uh what was the first part of it um how would you explain caring through lens of
free will or no free will would free will deniers say there is no caring when it appears that
agents can or do fully care yeah no it's it it flies in the face of like uh our our everyday
experience so like yeah um I the the the amount of contradictions and like logic that doesn't
make sense when you go down that path of there being no free will or agency um you just you just
get into absurd territory it's I think when we look back it's going to look quaint that for so
long that we thought that everything was determined in a strict sense and it's really a big issue
because these people who believe that if they believe it if they take it to heart
they're experiencing cognitive dissonance at every moment you know and the people who
argue against agency they talk about religious people having to compartmentalize to deal with
you know the the real world but anybody who believes that we don't have agency has to compartmentalize
in the same way uh funny little conversation between Sam Harris and his wife um uh Annika Harris
who wrote a book called conscious that is a great accessible book but it leaves out like everything
that I've discussed and that I would discuss about like the Bayesian brain hypothesis uh global
workspace theory doesn't really go into integrate information theory in any depth so like all of
the things that they're missing that do explain a lot of this stuff uh can be found in like modern
neuroscience so we are making a lot of progress towards you know understanding the hard problem
of consciousness so subjective experience but also a free will and agency but it's funny because
they're having this conversation in the podcast and they're discussing whether since a belief in
no free will as mentioned that New York Times article I think 2011 showed that they have less
moral behavior and it can you know cause depression they're discussing whether they should tell their
daughter about free will or not that that she doesn't have any free will the discussion is like
should we tell our daughter that she doesn't have free will but the actual discussion implies that
they believe that they have some choice whether to tell her or not they're having a discussion
about whether they should do this or not so there's a contradiction in their conversation
that contradicts what they believe what's interesting is that if they do tell her that
she has no free will and she believes it she's actually gonna have negative mental effects
like it will ha you know be harmful um assuming that she really believes it I don't know if it has
that in in everyone but you do see studies that show that um so if we do have free will it's a very
bad thing to be telling people um and the last thing I'll say about that is well it's it's
interesting because if she's familiar with epistemology and they tell her that she doesn't have free will
but she goes okay that's based on a model that has uncertainty and that model may be disproved
then she might not have the negative effects of free will so I think
everyone should practice being a good Bayesian and understand that our models our theories even
the one that I just talked about um will have errors and will be shown to be wrong and if
reductionists do that they won't call free will belief and free will like comparing them to horoscopes
which is just I think a horrible statement and kind of funny that physicists don't like it
when like neuroscientists start and biologists start like talking about physics it's kind of
strange that physicists are are so sure that we don't have free will when they're not familiar
at all with the neuroscience behind agency and free will so would you like me to just
read a comment in the chat otherwise I think we can kind of come to a close um if there's anything
yeah I can do one more question yeah well uh Marco and Dave and others thanks a lot for the great
comments and commentary in the chat I hope that Bobby I hope you check the live chat replay
and uh Sean O'Connor wrote thanks for the good and informative talk Dr Azarian mentioned the idea
of evolutionary arms race I was hoping to recommend that he consider if he hasn't
how an introspect specific evolutionary arms race may relate I'm not familiar with the introspect
specific so uh perhaps like a game theory red queen not between uh two species but within one
species yes so you have an evolutionary arms race there too yeah certainly because you're
competing with other organisms um and uh uh John Maynard Smith who I mentioned earlier
talking about like this causal power of information biology he uh was the person to bring
von Neumann's game theory to biological evolution so he did all he basically showed that there is
this you know game theory sort of process being played out I think he his examples use different
species but I think within species um you would see the sorts same sort of thing of course if it's
not humans you know if you have other species people are competing organisms are competing
you will get increased complexity but there are limits so just because there's these evolutionary
arm races uh within and between species there will still be a limit because uh they have to model
the environment and just modeling all these unnecessary variables uh is is wasteful so um
it will ratchet up complexity in species but um I think at least with the planet earth and our
biosphere that uh that humans are this sort of leading envelope uh of complexity and um so it
really just is open-ended with the most complex species so the most complex species is the one
that will evolve toward higher complexity and uh really there might be a limit there there are
reasons to think there are limits to how far human biological intelligence can emerge there's
I mean can evolve towards there's something called a sephalization limit which is like
how big our brain can get because of reasons like having to do with like the skull and um
so but what's interesting is part of this process this evolutionary process is as popper and
newer people like Dennett have mentioned continues with science and culture and technology
so humans really have open-ended complexity because we're uh we're augmenting ourselves
with technology so while biology biological complexity may have limits there's no limits
once we start merging with our technology and we shouldn't see technology as separate from life
it's an extension of biology so the extended phenotype Richard Balkans explains like beaver
dams considers like the dam that the beaver instinctually builds as part of the whole phenotype
so the ecosystem the organism there's really no clear division between the organism and the
ecosystem and David Chalmers has the extended mind hypothesis which says that our phones our
extensions of our minds and um all of our devices are and for that reason we need to be worried
about privacy but we also need to not be scared of technology we just need to use technology to
become more human so we're not transcending like humanity and biology uh technology will
allow us to become hyper biological very interesting note perhaps to close it on
anytime you want the dot too we can make it happen it can be any format we can invite anyone else on
um really awesome and interesting to think about do you want any last words um if if I come back
to talk about free-wown agency it'd be great to have like Kevin Mitchell or um maybe Eric
Well who's done a lot of work on a top-down causation and causal emergence that was really
influenced uh influential in the book um thank if you know people you can um twitter tag them or
email us and uh email them and cc us or just contact us and we'll do that on our side thanks
been super fun thanks daniel really appreciate it really appreciate you reading a draft of the
manuscript just like in a few days to give me some feedback that actually helps clear up
little mistakes in the book um I heard you mentioned marco thanks uh to marco and anybody
else who's uh been watching and chiming in with questions really appreciate it sorry for the
information overload maybe watch this again maybe micro does or um maybe some legal stuff delta eight
water micro does water stay hydrated people who are it's legal keep